# Marlyne (Alain) Reindl

I, Marlyne Marie, was brought into this world on August 21, 1938 in the Red Cross House in Hudson Bay Junction by Dr. J.B. Silver. Mom told me that my teeth were slow in coming and she even took me to the good doctor to see what was the matter. He reassured her that I would have teeth -- just have patience! Sure enough at the age of thirteen months my first tooth appeared. I can imagine Mom's joy in knowing that I was normal.

My early childhood was spent playing with my closest friend and sister, Maxine. Being only a year and a week apart had its benefits. I do not remember living down east but stories have it that Maxine and I had a large number of dolls complete with a glass tea set and a sleigh. When we moved to Grandpa Alain's sawmill south of Veillardville, I can remember him promising Maxine and me a chew of his plug of tobacco if we could move the old steel tractor wheel which was frozen deep in the snow. Even though we were small our determination to get an honest chew prevailed as we got dressed in our warm woolies and scarves. We took our leather shoe lace and headed for the wheel. To this date I know we never moved the wheel but I honestly don't recall getting a chew either. Grandpa meant and kept his word. I remember a bit of the life in that bunkhouse where Mom cooked for the sawmill crew. We slept in a bunk that had a straw mattress. No doubt my fear of mice began around this time and has continued to the present time. One Christmas, years later, Maxine and I were given small penlight flashlights, a gift from Uncle Joe and Aunt Helen. We were so proud of them as we could investigate many things under the cover of darkness, which included doing a bit of reading without Mom and Dad knowing about it. It seems a mouse was making a nest out of tissue paper in the bottom of the container holding up the tree. After everyone had gone to bed and it was quiet, this mouse would do its work and make a funny noise. We never caught him in the act but he did jump on me while I was sleeping! Of course I screamed loudly and soon Mom came to see who had been killed and there I was, just scared silly and not wanting to go back to bed till she had checked the whole room for it. We never found him but, knowing that my Mom had checked the room, was all I needed. It seems that I have always been afraid of mice and yet I've been in many situations where mice were present -- stooking, making hay and camping.

I can still remember the day that the bulldozer cleared the land in front of our house and seeing Dad black as coal from pulling out the stumps and roots. As we grew older we did what work we could to help him. It seemed that Saturday was THE day to pick stones and, oh, how we hated that job of walking behind a slowly moving tractor and stoneboat or a trailer. Dad would place us evenly on each side and direct us as our eyes deliberately avoided seeing many stones. I can still hear him call, "Hey, there's one over there."

We appreciated help and especially when a Jaszan boy came out one Saturday. After Dad told him where a stone was (as if he didn't know) Dad proceeded to tell him that if this stone wasn't picked now it would be bigger next year. We knew full well how important it was to have clean fields for seeding, cultivating and combining, yet we also knew that stones wouldn't grow -- however we never told Dad!

It was not all work -- there was lots of fun riding on the tractor with Dad. He would tell us stories and talk about life in general or he'd sing some funny French songs. One very hot day we were driving home from the homestead and had a hired man with us who was complaining about having to work in the heat. Dad promised him a swim when we reached the water in the distance. We were all terribly disappointed as there was no water -- just a field of flax in bloom. It wasn't long till we were home and were all treated to one of Mom's ice cream cones. Now, that was a treat!

Most Saturdays we had an early supper, bathed and got all dressed up so we could go to town. That was a big event for most people. While Mom and Dad shopped we walked up and down the streets -- hoping to see school friends, cousins and have a peek at the boys, too. Many times we were given money to go to a show which cost 10¢ at that time. That was a lot of money in those days and I remember Dad gave us a nickel once...it was all he had to spare and so it meant us saving it till next Saturday, if we really wanted to see a movie.

During those years Mom was busy sewing for us. She could make blouses, dresses and coats faster and better than anyone I knew. We kids tried on and tried on and pranced in front of Dad for a word of approval many times. We girls must have had more clothes than whole families put together. I was always proud to wear my clothes as they were in style and colors were well suited to me. When I think back I wonder how Mom did it all -- looked after a big garden (complete with tons of raspberries), doing chores, baking, cooking, and still she had time to sew for all of us. She also understood what kids liked and, for one of our birthdays, treated Maxine and me to a banana split. We nearly split as it was so filling -- there was more for 40¢ then than now for $1.99.

I attended White Poplar School #4269 from grades one through eight and I remember having the following teachers: Ruth Kosher, Helen Howse, Arlene Carnahan and Mrs. Smith. A ride to school with Joyce and Heather May with their horse and buggy or cutter was fun for me and a relief to Mom knowing that I had made it both ways as two and a half miles was a long way for a six year old. I remember having good lunches as we could always trade with someone else for a variety. During the winter, our teachers used to heat a boiler of water on the stove and we'd bring jars of soup, cocoa, and pork and beans to heat up. What a treat! This was really living! Of course it also meant we could interrupt the teacher by asking permission to put our jar in the water to heat up. That excuse was used more than once. Something else I'll never forget was the outdoor biffy which seemed to be a mile away.

Christmas concerts and practicing go together very well. One year Miss Carnahan, a teacher who enjoyed sports of all kinds, decided that our school would learn to dance as well as do gymnastics for the concert. And so we did the Irish Jig, square dancing, and lots of tumbling which ended with a pyramid. Talk about fun!

During my grade eight, I was sick with mumps, chicken pox and measles one after the other. That year I wasn't in the concert. However, I attended it and wore a new taffeta dress which Mom had made while I was sick at home. I managed to pass my grade even though I had missed so much school.

I took my grade nine in Hudson Bay where I boarded with Grandma Strasser. That year I nearly failed and was not too disappointed when Mom and Dad announced that Maxine and I would be going to the convent in Zenon Park that fall. Zenon Park was 70 to 80 miles away and meant only coming home for Christmas and Easter holidays. After a while I didn't want to go home as I had a boyfriend and wanted to spend free time or holidays near him.

One Easter we came home on the train and it took hours and hours to go from Zenon Park to Veillardville. We stopped at every station and picked up everything, including cattle. Other times we stopped to wait for the snow plow because there was too much snow on the rails. The conductor and trainmen would tease Maxine and me about the engine running out of fuel. I doubt if we were really worried because we had enough lunch to feed the whole crew...the Sisters were very generous. When at last we arrived at Veillardville, the train stopped and we got off into 3 feet of fresh snow. We started to walk quickly as we were excited and happy to be nearly home. However, we soon slowed down because the snow was so deep. It didn't take us long to discover that the banks made by the snow plow was the best place to walk, as we were up high and the peaks were hard. We were warmly welcomed as everyone thought we wouldn't be coming home as it was getting late. We ate a warm breakfast and went to bed. Our arms were ever so tired from carrying those heavy suitcases. We hadn't learned to travel light.

I graduated from grade twelve in 1956 and, that summer, I worked at Sinclair Drugs in Hudson Bay and found it to be a great experience. Jo Soules and Sinc were very patient with and kind to me.

In the fall of 1956 I was off to Teachers College in Saskatoon where I boarded with Aunt Mae and Uncle Bernie and their family. After practice teaching at Aberdeen and Allan and completing numerous assignments, I received my teaching certificate. I taught in Ile a La Crosse in northern Saskatchewan. This is a beautiful small community at the tip of a peninsula. In those days the road was not very good and so most people flew in or took the road so far and boated across the small narrows to land. I was hired to teach but had not been assigned a class and when I got to this landing some of the other teachers were there waiting for the barge to take them across. There were 4 new teachers and 4 positions empty. We chose our class by drawing straws. Mine being the shortest, I was given grade one -- 26 little Native children. What a challenge and, yes, a disappointment too as I had not been prepared for grade one. However, I didn't mind too much as it was here that I met Adolf. A new hospital was being constructed and Adolf was the terrazzo floor finisher and a real good one, too.

Adolf was born April 22, 1938, in Salzburg, Austria to Franz Reindl and Theresia Dollberger. In his search for a better life Adolf came to Canada September 17, 1956. Our friendship developed into love and shortly after, we began to make wedding plans.

Adolf and I were married in Meadow Lake on May 24, 1958. Our witnesses were my sister, Maxine, and Benny Colasimone, a friend of Adolf's. Following a small lunch, we drove to Veillardville for a surprise wedding reception. I still have the red scribbler which was used as a guest register and gift book. I read it occasionally and reminisce about all those who signed it.

We moved to Saskatoon where Adolf sold pots and pans and did anything to make a living as he was laid off at the same time we were married. What a way to begin married life but, being young and in love, we didn't mind. However, Bob was born September 30 the same year and, with winter settling in and rent to be paid, it was necessary for one of us to find work. I answered an ad for a teaching position in the Muskeegan area (close to Prairie River) and much to my surprise I was hired. So once again I was teaching but it was different as I now had a country school, grades one to nine with sixteen children in all.

We lived in the one bedroom, two-room teacherage in the school yard, no power and no running water. When I look back I don't know how we did it as we'd gotten so accustomed to these luxuries and, with a baby, there was always diapers to wash and no place to hang them except on lines strung from wall to wall. Of course that meant you couldn't have company with diapers hanging over your head. But we did spend many evenings playing cards and visiting neighbors, John and Mary Belanko.

That spring I planted my first garden and was extremely proud of it, too, until Mom and Dad came for a Sunday visit and they discovered that all my onion tops had curls in them. Yes, I had planted them upside down. During the winter Adolf worked in the bush camp close to Muskeegan. Once spring arrived he was fortunate in getting farm work at Thode's farm south of Veillardville and, by then, school was over so we moved close to Mom and Dad's where we stayed till the end of August.

We were expecting our second child and were wondering if Adolf would ever get steady work to support our growing family. Luck was with us as he was called to Lynn Lake; however, that left me alone and it was only a short time until Geraldine would be born. Grandpa Alain helped me move our few belongings to a rented suite in Hudson Bay. Geraldine was born October 8, 1959; baptized at home by Father Dubois, who insisted that it was not right to baptize at home but he did say it was okay for royalty. So I proceeded to tell him to pretend she was our little Indian Princess, which she was and still is today. She was baptized!

Early in November we moved up north to Lynn Lake where we shared a house with a family whose mother was away and so I looked after their four children and our own two, which gave me six under six. Mind you, we now had running water. electricity and a warm house. Our first Christmas away from home was different -- especially when Adolf found the perfect tree from the bush which only had branches on three sides so he drilled holes and put branches in. It was always a challenge to find a tree with branches on all sides up there. But we never gave up.

Life in the North was great -- nice summers and long cold winters. It wasn't long till we had a lovely addition to our family when Louella was born on April 14, 1961 followed by Mark on September 13, 1962. They were all good babies and loved to travel. In the spring of 1963, Mom and Dad sold their farm and moved to B.C., so we planned to take our holidays and visit them. They had just moved there and were still in the midst of moving into their little house and, with our four children, it didn't help much but it was grand being all together once again. We slept upstairs where there was no trap door on the floor opening and two-year-old Louella fell down to the kitchen floor the first day we were there and again the morning we left. Fortunately, she wasn't hurt either time.

We loved the North but we didn't want to spend our whole life there and, with Bob now five years old, we decided that if we were to move south before the children started school we should do it now; so we sold our house and moved to our present home in Saskatoon in November 1963. Adolf saw that his family was well settled and then returned to Lynn Lake to work. In the meantime, I started to write to the Potash Company of America mine reminding them that Adolf would like to work for them. It took a while for results but it paid off and, in March 1965, Adolf was hired. The bosses knew him as they referred to him as their "Pen Pal." We didn't care as long as he had work close to home. He has been employed with PCA for over twenty years and loves his work. He started as shaft and bin man, then trained as hoist operator. Like Adolf says, "Where else can you read to your heart's content and still get paid, too?" With Adolf working steady, our life began to take on a sense of normalcy.

Once the children were in school, I had more free time. I was active with the Girl Guides, Home and School, and Catholic Women's League. There was committee work to assist with the cultural exchange trips to Quebec and likewise when Bob was in Track and Field. The years went by quickly and soon all the children had graduated from high school and slowly they started to venture out on their own.

The next five years our family started to grow. **Bob** was the first to marry, in October 1980, to his track and field sweetheart, Caren Rathie. Shortly after that, in May 1981, **Geraldine** married her sweetheart from Calgary, Brian Law. Then, in February 1983, our first grandson, Ryan, was born to Brian and Gerri. Then, in April 1984, **Louella** married her high school beau, Brad Sim. That same year, in the month of May, our second grandson, Jason, was born to Bob and Caren. Then, to finish the year off, our first granddaughter, Breanne, was born to Brian and Gerri. In July 1985, **Mark** married a Saskatoon girl, Keeran Reed. The following month, August, brought our second Reindl boy, Kyle, born to Bob and Caren.

It has been a wonderful life with a good and faithful husband and father along with four interesting and lively children who made me feel good about staying home and being a full-time mother -- something I have never regretted.

Our children have insisted that we, as a family, spend time together even though they have families of their own. We are deeply proud of them and hope they will continue this tradition with their own families. We have many hours of fun plus an opportunity to get to know and understand each other. My parents always enjoyed having family around or visiting them -- a value which is now being passed on.

Adolf and I are enjoying our middle years camping, travelling and visiting with our grandchildren. We are home to anyone wishing to visit and look forward to these special times. Adolf still finds time for home renovations and painting when called upon, and hauling and splitting wood for our two fireplaces while I have taken on various positions with the C.W.L., the latest one being Diocesan President. We never seem to be bored as there is always something to be done at home or for someone else.
