# Marcella (Alain) Sevigny

I was born in Hudson Bay Junction Union Hospital, April 5, 1944. I was baptized by Father Van Vynk at the Rectory on April 11. Hector Maynard and Grandma Strasser were in attendance as proxy godparents for Aunt Berthe and Uncle Paul Marsollier who resided in Flin Flon, Manitoba.

In 1948, at the age of four, I remember boarding a train for Saskatoon where I was to be a flower girl for my Aunt Mae Strasser's wedding. Since there was no station agent in Veillardville, we had to flag the train down. Aunt Mae was married on October 9th. (That date never rang a bell till my own wedding on the same date twenty-three years later - 1971.)

Two years later saw me starting school with four cousins: three of them Alains - Lorne, Simone and Lynn; and one Lessard - Susan.

What a year Miss Carnahan had with ten of us in grade one, and I was related to four of them! Of course, this was all in a one room school. That year, as part of the Christmas concert, we sang "Ten Little Indians".

For those of you who remember, Simone Alain and I went to school in a little cart pulled by her horse, Tony. My contribution was his feed which consisted of a bag of chopped oats or chop, as we called it. Tony was always so slow and pokey; Marlyne and Maxine would walk and get to school before us. However, one day a train went by just before we got to the crossing in Veillardville and it spooked Tony. Well, he reared and took off galloping with Simone and I in tow, yelling and screaming our heads off. Marlyne, who had been walking behind us, ran and helped calm Tony down, along with Arnold Sauer and a couple of other men who worked on the tracks. When we arrived at school, everyone mentioned how pale we looked.

I vividly recall a big snowstorm in February of that year. We had gone to school with Wayne Barry, a nephew of our neighbours, Ed and Lil Barry. Wayne was driving a horse which was pulling a stoneboat. Huge fluffy snowflakes were falling that morning. Coming home from school early, for the teacher dismissed us around 2:00 p.m. instead of the usual 3:30, we had to unhitch the stoneboat at Uncle Smokey's store and hoof it. As Maxine and I were the smallest, we got to ride horseback for half a mile. After that, the drifts got so deep the horse couldn't jump them so Wayne and Marlyne made Maxine get off the horse and I alone was left to ride. When we got to the last quarter of a mile, we abandoned the road and walked in Thrussell's field where the snow was still deep but at least hadn't drifted. It was quite a relief to make it home safe and sound. I remember thinking how brave Wayne, Marlyne and Maxine were to keep going. Being only six years old, I would have preferred to stop and rest for a while in the field. Only years later did I realize their wisdom and accuracy of judgment.

The winter I was nine years old, Mom paid for ten piano lessons for me as well as ten tap dancing lessons. I remember how much I enjoyed those lessons, especially the tap dancing ones. (I was able to pursue my music lessons when I was in grade nine as a trade-off for doing dishes in the kitchen of the boarding school I attended.) It must have been a real sacrifice for Mom to pay for those lessons. The first two weeks she told me to tap in the basement on the cement floor so Dad wouldn't know I was taking the lessons. I imagine Mom didn't want Dad to get upset over spending money in that fashion.

In May of that year, the day of the recital, I walked from White Poplar School to Hudson Bay. Dad was seeding and Mom couldn't drive the car. It was close to 90° F. and the five miles seemed like an eternity. I finally arrived at Grandma Strasser's home, dusty and perspiring. The first thing she did was put me in the tub for a warm bath. That was a real thrill because we didn't have running water, much less a built-in tub at home. I think Mom may have gotten a ride into town with Aunt Yvonne that night because she was there to see me perform.

One experience I would like to relive from my childhood is walking on the road in my bare feet while it was raining. We would sort of "skate" on the road and look at our funny tracks, all the while enjoying the feel of mud squishing through our toes. That was a really enjoyable experience. As our roads had no pavement, not even gravel on them, they were very smooth with only the odd little stone to scratch our feet.

We had a lot of snow one year and the spring run-off was particularly heavy. As the snow melted and the water drained into the creek, the latter became very swollen and began washing away the bridge near our home. One afternoon Mom couldn't find Bruce. Walking as far as the bridge, she panicked when she saw how much earth had been washed away beside the bridge. Fearing the worst, that Bruce had been swept away in the flood waters, she asked me to jump the crevasse and run to Uncle Rolland's, the distance of a mile, to see if Bruce might have gone there. I don't remember stopping once to walk. I just ran hoping and praying that I would find him. As I turned into Uncle Rolland's driveway, I could see Bruce sitting on the steps with Aunt Yvonne and Gordon Menzies looking through the pages of the new Eatons or Simpsons-Sears Spring and Summer catalogue. I remember feeling absolutely enraged at his calmness. Naturally, he had no idea I was so upset. Running back home, we made the dreadful error of running one behind the other. Mom could only see one person so she was sure her worst fears were confirmed, yet she stayed by the bridge, waiting. You should have seen the look on her face when she finally made the two of us out. When we arrived at the bridge she instructed us to remove our boots and throw them across. Being lighter, we could then run and jump over the washed out section which, by then, was two to two-and-a-half feet wide with water hissing and gushing rapidly through that section of the road. Being the younger of the two, Bruce threw his boots across first. His aim was poor and one of his boots landed in the angry water and was instantly washed downstream. That upset Mom but having Bruce back home safe and sound was better than the loss of one rubber boot.

Little traditions that remain in my mind were the Saturday evening bath – one after the other, beginning with the baby all the way up to Mom and Dad. As the water cooled with each successive bath, we added more hot water which had been heated on the woodstove. A treat of popcorn or fudge always followed our bath in the winter. Grandpa Alain would walk to our place – three-quarters of a mile – to listen to the hockey game on the radio. He was hard of hearing so consequently the volume was turned up quite high. In the summer, we would polish everyone's shoes and have our bath just before supper. We would go to town right after. Sometimes we would peddle raspberries for 25¢ a basket. Other times, we would sell butter, eggs or cream. In those days, when we had too much cream, we would ship it to Prince Albert on the train in big cream cans. Then Mom would receive a small cheque in the mail later. That was her only income along with the berries, butter and egg money combined with the Family Allowance.

When in town on Saturday we would go to the locker plant and, with our own key, we would take out all the meat we would need for the following week. This, of course, preceded 1957, the year in which power came to our area.

My childhood was pretty uneventful except for the occasions when Dad would get me to peel green fence posts for 3¢ a post. The idea of earning money always spurred me on. Then, if that became too boring, Dad could always think of other chores needing to be done: cows to chase out of the wheat field, a fence to mend, grain to shovel or tools to pick up and put in the shed. Early on I had made up my mind to work outside with Dad rather than stay in the house doing housework with Mom. To this day, making meals is not one of my priorities. However, to reward us for all the hard work, I got to go to the Melfort Fair and the Saskatoon Exhibition once. When we went to Saskatoon Mom and Dad took Norbert Marsollier, my cousin, with us. I was nine or ten years old then. While in Saskatoon, Norbert took me to my first three-dimensional movie. What an experience that was, wearing those funny little glasses. I also recall visiting Mr. and Mrs. Henri Dinelle, family friends, who used to live on Uncle Rolland's farm.

Each year, at the end of June, for passing our grade Dad would present us with a new pair of leather gloves to make hay with. Our summers were spent picking wild strawberries - enough so Mom could can one hundred jars of wild straw berry jam every year. From 8 a.m. till 9 a.m. we would pick stones in the fields, then come home and make hay till suppertime. Then at night we picked stones from 8 till 9 p.m. Exhausted, we had no trouble going to sleep which was often to the sounds of frogs croaking or the beavers slap ping their tails on the water in the creek behind our house.

When any of the machinery broke down, Bruce and I would sometimes have to stay in a field and wait for Dad to come back. To fill in the time, we would build a lean-to, examine field mice nests or compare tans and muscle size. When Dad would come back from changing fields, from a repair or to pick us up from stooking, he would examine what we had done. If it didn't meet his standards, we knew about it. One time we had stooked a big field and a powerful wind came and knocked over most of our stooks. I always said Bruce's stooks were the ones that fell down, not mine! Nevertheless, we both had to re-stook the field.

A special event most summers was to have our Marsollier and Menzies cousins arrive from Flin Flon, Manitoba, to visit. They were real city folk to us. The little contact we had with them in those days helped to keep family ties together. We picked names for Christmas gifts on both sides of the family and, to this day, I still remember the excitement of receiving a gift from a cousin who lived in the city, whether it be Hamilton or Flin Flon.

At the age of seven, Mom took Bernie and me to Flin Flon for Easter. Bernie was only two and a half years old and it was her first train ride. She stuttered when she talked and, when she woke up the next morning, she looked out the window. As the train sped by, she said in her little excited voice, "MMMommy, ttttthe tttttrees aaare rrrr running." Everyone in the coach started to laugh. While we were gone Dad couldn't find the Easter eggs Mom had hidden. In fact, she had hid them so well, it took a full two years to find them.

I made the trip to Flin Flon once more at the age of twelve with my cousin Simone. To help with the burden of feeding us during our visit, Mom sent a shopping bag full of meat which I was instructed to leave between the cars on the train so it would stay frozen. I remember being embarrassed to ask the trainman if I could and he did not object.

A highlight of each year was the track and field sports day in Hudson Bay. Simone and I were almost always in the same races and jumping contests: broad jump, high jump and hop step-and-jump. She was usually first and I was often second. Occasionally we got to advance to Porcupine Plains or Somme for another meet. But just going to Hudson Bay was a big thrill. White Poplar often won the prize for the best banner and school yell. One year when Mrs. L. Smith taught, the yell included some of the following words: "Busy Bees, Busy Bees; We are workers, never shirkers; Busy Bees, Busy Bees." We won first that year.

Another highpoint I should mention was the annual Christmas concert. Dad would come to school in early December and set up the stage which would remain till the Christmas holidays. Those concerts sported standing room only. They always held a kind of magical spell over me and culminated with the appearance of Santa Claus. One year, when Bernadette was a baby, Mom had her in her arms standing just behind Mr. Veillard who was on the short side. Bernie would drool on his bald head, put her pudgey hands in it and rub it all over his crown. Mom would get upset and try to stop her but Mr. Veillard said, "Let her be, it's keeping her quiet."

A favorite pastime Bruce and I had as children was to play on one of Dad's old binders. There, nestled in an old spool of binder twine, we would often find robins' nests and, sometimes, even eggs. We also played in the old caboose and sometimes in the buggy under the trees behind the chicken coop. We were always fascinated by birds' nests, whether they were in the barn, in the rafters of the granaries or in the garage. On rainy days, Bruce and I would close the door to our bedroom and out would come the Monopoly game which would occupy us for hours.

One game I vividly recall playing as a child was Anti-Anti-I-Over. It was played by throwing a ball over the house. One had to catch the ball and try to get to the other side of the house without being touched or tagged. It was usually played in teams. If you were tagged with the ball, you had to join forces with the other team. One day Bruce broke Mom and Dad's bedroom window. We all vowed not to tell who did it. Bernie suggested we go inside and pray that we wouldn't be punished.

Dad, I think, missed playing ball and one year, he bought Bruce a right-handed glove and a left-handed one for himself. He used to play catch with us when he had the time. When we got better at the sport, he eventually gave me his glove and Bruce and I played together.

I have some fond memories of Grandpa Alain. The job he held in his later years was that of watching out for fires from a high tower up north. He travelled to and from work in his old Model T Ford. He would toot his horn when he went past our place. It had a unique sound. On special occasions, he would let us ride in the rumble seat. Mom and Dad thought he was a little too permissive but we loved him for it. One day he took Simone, Lynn and Gabrielle to Ruby Lake for a swim. It was very hot that summer. He also asked me to go along but I had to make hay. Needless to say, I was jealous of those who got to go.

As I mentioned earlier, Grandpa was quite deaf in later years. Well, one day I was out in his car with him and the two of us nearly got hit by a train at the Veillardville crossing. Grandpa hadn't heard the whistle and I was telling him to stop but he kept on going. The train sped over the siding just seconds after we crossed it. Grandpa was always singing or humming. He always appeared to be in a good mood. He sang in the church choir with three of his children, Smokey, Rolland and Edithe.

Once a week after school I would wash Grandma Alain's kitchen floor. She would give me a big rubber pad inside a brown bag to put under my knees. This, I thought, was rather nifty as I didn't have such comfort while working at home. Lynn would invariably come over and the two of us would giggle and giggle as Grandma gave us our traditional glass of tomato juice to drink. She often kept me for supper those nights which was a real thrill for me.

At the age of thirteen, I left home to go to boarding school in Zenon Park, Saskatchewan, for grade nine. After grade ten, at the age of fifteen, I entered the Order of French Sisters who taught in Zenon Park: Les Soeurs de la Charité de Notre Dame D'Evron. While with the Sisters, I completed my high school and attended College St. Jean and the University of Alberta. I then taught at St. Thomas d'Aquin Elementary School in Edmonton for two years. After nine years with the Sisters, I decided it really was not my vocation and I left the Order in June 1968.

I continued teaching, this time at St. Nicholas and finished my Bachelor of Education at the University of Alberta in 1970. I then taught Music and Family Life at St. Nicholas and at St. Cecilia Junior High Schools. On October 9, 1971, I married Richard Sévigny. A year after our marriage we both returned to university to do the course work for our Masters degrees. It was a year neither of us will ever forget: taking the courses, struggling through statistics and exams together.

Richard is a native Edmontonian, born July 17, 1948, of French-Canadian ancestry. In high school he attended Holy Redeemer College with the Redemptorists and went to Winnipeg for his B.A. under their tutelage. He majored in Philosophy and Sociology. His parents, Arthur and Alice, still reside in Edmonton.

January 1, 1975, saw us move to Sydney, Nova Scotia, where we have resided ever since. In 1976, after a lot of hard work, I finally obtained a Masters degree in Science (M.Sc.) in Family Studies from the University of Alberta and Richard obtained his in 1978. For four years, the two of us worked as the Family Life Coordinator couple for Family Service of Eastern Nova Scotia. Richard worked by himself for a few years after I resigned; then in 1982 he was named Executive Director of the agency. That year I began to teach Music For Young Children in our home. Today I teach an average of thirty students a week from the ages of 3½ to 9, comprised of six or seven classes.

My other interests and activities have been with the C.W.L., Right to Life, and SERENA where, along with Richard, we teach other couples Natural Family Planning. For eight years we both taught Childbirth Education classes (Lamaze). I also taught French Immersion for two years here in Sydney.

We have been blessed with three boys: **Paul** René, born July 30, 1974; **Camille** Alain, born September 15, 1977; and **Martin** Thomas, who was adopted by us in March 1979, was born December 21, 1978. At the present time all three boys are involved in music, elocution, Beavers, Cubs, swimming, soccer, and hockey.
