# Kendall Louise Adrian

On September 18, 1966, I was born in New Westminster, B.C., but my parents were living in Port Moody. One of my fondest memories of living in Vancouver was receiving a free pass in my year end report card to attend the Pacific National Exhibition. Also, when living in Vancouver, it was a real treat to visit Grandma and Grandpa Alain in Vernon, B.C. because you knew that every morning you would receive caramel spread on toast. It was Grandpa's favorite. The biggest highlight of living in Vancouver was on August 28, 1973, when my sister Shantell was born.

I left Vancouver at the age of eight and moved to Vernon, B.C. for a short period of time and then on to Alberta for two years. Well, I guess Mom and Dad were homesick so off to the Okanagan we went again. By this time, I was twelve and decided to carry on the family tradition and join the Vernon Girls Trumpet Band. I played the cymbals just as my aunts (Michelle and Rachelle) had done.

Just short of my fourteenth birthday, Mom and Dad (the jet setters) decided it was time to move back to Edmonton, Alberta. While living there, I attended high school and worked part time at the Terrace Inn and Convention Inn. I'd have to say one of my fondest memories was meeting my friend, Graham Murray. We worked together for a short time until he and his family moved to Toronto, Ontario. Well, for the year and a half that I had left of high school, we corresponded back and forth. Being just a little too impatient, I decided I'd finish high school two credits short and work full time for a few months. Then, in March of 1984, I moved to Toronto and carried on working and completing my high school diploma. After living in Toronto a year, it was time to go back to school. I enrolled in a two-year Legal Secretarial program and have now completed my first year.
