# Rachelle (Alain) Toews

I was the fifth child born to Louis and Clara Alain and was named Rachelle Alma after my two grandmothers - Rachel (Strasser) and Alma (Alain). My twelve years on the farm bring back fond memories. I would have to think my greatest memories, however, have to be with the Christmas season... going to Midnight Mass in Hudson Bay, Mom always forgetting something in the house and having to go back in. When we would get back from Mass we would have a lunch and our door to the front room would remain shut until after we had finished eating. Then, lo and behold! When we were finally able to go in Santa had already arrived! There were always needed necessities such as clothing and, usually, a new doll and/or a toy or games.

Growing up on a farm made for lots of work in the spring, summer and fall. I remember coming home from school, changing clothes and going out again to do the dreadful job of picking stones. I was always sure that Dad had a factory just making these stones for him, as they always appeared each and every spring. We also had haying to do but, being one of the younger children, I did not have as much work to do as the older ones had. Surprisingly, some of the things that come to mind when I think of the farm is not the work but rather other things such as: the root beer Mom made, picking strawberries for jam and eating, swimming in the dug-out, and learning how to skate on our creek with the help of a chair which I pushed in front of me.

I started school at White Poplar with Mrs. Smith as my teacher. I remember being so proud of myself that first year ranking first in my class. Mind you, there were only four of us but, at six years of age, that must have meant that I was really smart; I look back now and chuckle.

We used to have great Christmas concerts at the hall in Veillardville. Many, many hours were spent practising our lines for the big night which ended with Santa Claus' arrival. Treats were then given out.

In the summer we went to Catechism in Hudson Bay and stayed with Grandma Strasser for the week. Sister Louise and Sister Clare were the teachers that I remember the best. One summer I had a hard time keeping bangs on my forehead. First of all I had decided that if Bernie was old enough to cut her bangs, so was I. So, after she had finished cutting her bangs, I sat down on the sewing machine stool and proceeded to cut my bangs. Well, they just would not come out straight; so I kept trying and, by the time I decided to stop, there was not much hair left on my forehead to call bangs anymore. The next morning I went to Catechism and wore my little blue cap. The Sisters took off my cap and they put it right back on when they realized why I was wearing it. The next time I had problems with my hair was in Mrs. Smith's class in Hudson Bay. I was chewing gum in class (which was a no-no) when I was called upon to answer a question. I took the gum out of my mouth and put it in my hand and then put my hand to my forehead to pretend I had a headache. Well... my gum got stuck in my hair, if you can imagine!!! I told a friend what I had done and the next thing I knew, Mrs. Smith was taking me out of class. She had no sympathy for me as she proceeded to cut the gum out of my hair. Once again my little blue cap was on my head!!

I continued going to school in Hudson Bay until Easter of my sixth grade when Mom, Dad, Michelle and Joey moved to Vernon, British Columbia. I finished my grade six at the convent in Zenon Park, Saskatchewan. Bernie was already going there, having started in the fall. I thought I would have the time of my life what with our own Sister Marcella there but, quickly, I learned that there would be no special privileges. She was always fair to us though. At the end of the term, proudly holding onto my report card that said I was promoted to grade seven, Bernie and I boarded the bus that was to take us on our first trip to the west, and to our new home in Vernon, B.C.

We lived in Vernon till the summer of '64, when we moved to Golden, B.C. I remember going to bed one night and being woken up about 11:00 P.M. by a mobile home being moved into the trailer park beside us. Mom was after Bernie and me to get to know the nice boy next door. He seemed to be about Bernie's age and Mom told us that we were all new to this town and that at least we would know someone when we all started school in a couple of weeks. Well, when school started, this new boy named Dana Toews, Bernie and I all went to school together. We were always being asked if we were brother and sisters. I was quick to reply, "NO!!" For some reason I just did not like him at all. (But somewhere along the road I changed my mind, for just three years later Dana and I were married.) Our family lived in Golden, B.C. for one year and then returned to Vernon where I continued in school.

It was shortly after arriving back in Vernon that I came across an article in our local paper that mentioned THE VERNON GIRLS TRUMPET BAND. The article said the band was looking for new recruits and would begin training again in the fall. The paper went on to say the band would be going to Europe the following summer. The tour would include France, Switzerland and Holland. I remember telling Mom and Dad that I was going to join the band and that I would be with them when they went to Europe. They tried to explain to me that the older band members would go and that it would be very unlikely that a new band recruit would be picked. Well... determined as I am known to be at times, I joined the band in the fall. I started out playing the drums. I knew right away that I would never make a drummer and, besides that, there were quite a few drummers already. I just knew I would never get to Europe that way. Fate stepped in shortly afterwards; one of the girls that played the cymbals was quitting the band and word was out that the band needed a cymbal player. I jumped at the chance. It was then, after a few weeks of practice, that I joined the main core of the band and also secured a position for Europe in th summer. I could not wait to tell everyone my good news starting, of course, wth Mom and Dad.

We landed in Amsterdam, Holland, on August 11, 1966 which, incidentally, was my fifteenth birthday. In Europe we did a lot of touring -- seeing places such as Geneva, Paris, Amsterdam, and many smaller centers. We arrived back home a very homesick group. We had been away six weeks. The only thing about this trip that I regret is that I was too young for such a trip. My reason for saying this is that I have forgotten most of my trip. I wished I could have been about ten years older at the time. I stayed in the band till the end of that year, at which time I moved to Saskatchewan.

During the year since returning from Europe I met up with Dana, who was living in a little town called Avola in British Columbia. We started dating again. We were married that fall in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, on October 17, 1967. Mom and Dad were unable to be with us as they were at EXPO '67 in Montreal at the World's Fair. After we were married, we returned to Avola where Dana was working for the Department of Highways as a surveyor. We stayed in Avola for one year, during which time we became parents to our first child, **Lana Denice**, born on May 16, 1968.

When Lana was five months old we moved to Vernon, B.C. Dana had a job with a house-moving company. Shortly after we arrived in Vernon, I found I was going to have another baby. We stayed in Vernon only a couple of months and then we moved to Kelowna, B.C., where our second child was born. We named our son **John Abbott**. He was born July 16, 1969, fourteen months to the day Lana was born. We felt that our family was now complete, a boy and a girl. Not so... on September 21, 1971, just two years later, our third and last child, another son was born. We named him Terence Todd, but he is called **Todd**. My goodness, I was busy now! We were living in Mica Creek, British Columbia, at the time of Todd's birth.

We really did a lot of moving in the first ten years we were married. Vernon seemed to be the one place we kept moving to and away from. We moved to Alberta in September of 1979. Dana had been surveying for many years with the Department of Highways and later worked in construction at Mica Dam in British Columbia. He was also involved with the sign industry, having learned about manufacturing, installing and servicing while working for his mother and step-father who owned French Sign Service in Vernon. It was after the French Sign Service was sold and Dana could not find work in the Okanagan that we decided to move to Alberta.

The work situation was much better in Alberta at that time. Dana left Vernon around the fifteenth of August and found work right away. He stayed with my cousin, Pam Fell, in Edmonton when he first arrived in the city. On the twenty-fourth of August, Dana came back home. This was the day before Michelle's wedding to Ian Pepper. The plan now was for Dana to return to Edmonton the next day and I was to stay behind. We already had our home rented out. I was to follow in about a week with the children. We were putting our furniture into storage. When we had found living accommodations we would then come back to Vernon and complete our move to Edmonton. However, a major disaster awaited us the day after Michelle and Ian's wedding. We had taken them to the Kelowna airport where they would fly to Las Vegas, Nevada for a week's honeymoon. When we arrived back home we were met with some very bad news. Our home had burned. Thanks to our son John's quick thinking, no one was hurt. John and Todd had been watching television. One son was in our bedroom and the other was watching the television in the living room. They were watching the same show and when they found this out, they decided to both watch in the living room. All of a sudden John turned to Todd and asked him if he could smell something burning. They went and investigated. Sure enough, there was something burning. Our bedroom was on fire. John shut the bedroom door and quickly ran, with Todd beside him, across the road shouting, "FIRE, FIRE, FIRE" into his Grandpa and Grandma's house. He was only ten years old at the time. He dialed the fire department and then he calmed down long enough to tell everyone that, "Yes," our house was on fire. My Dad went right over but it was not a small fire by this time. The fire engines finally arrived. They put the fire out, which was later blamed on our instant-on television. Lana lost her pet hamster in the fire.

Things were in a real turmoil for quite sometime. However, life goes on and we eventually completed our move to Edmonton as we had planned. Dana went back into construction work as a surveyor. About six months after moving to Edmonton, Dana was offered a job in Bonnyville, Alberta. My gosh, would we ever stop moving around like Gypsies! The kids adjusted very well to our new place. Since we had just bought a brand new mobile home in Edmonton, we moved it into a new mobile home park in Bonnyville and this we called "home" for the next two and a half years. On July 1st, 1982 we moved back to Edmonton and have been in the same place ever since. We called upon my brother Bruce just after arriving here. We bought a very old mobile home that needed renovating. At that time Bruce was living in Vancouver and was not too busy, so he flew to Edmonton to build an addition on our place. This addition was almost the same size as the original trailer we bought. He stayed with us till the job was done and then returned to Vancouver.

Since moving to Edmonton life has definitely been hectic! Shortly after moving back, Dana was laid off. At that time he was in the union, still working as a surveyor. The job situation was not very good. Dana decided to start his own business. He picked up a little work here and there, still surveying. In July of 1984, Dana decided to start a sign servicing company as the construction in Alberta had almost come to a standstill. He went to Toronto and bought a used sign truck, and **Dana's Sign Service** came to be.

I was driving a school bus during this time. In the spring of 1984 we bought a doughnut machine and operated a concession in a flea market that had just opened. The next year started with Dana and myself owning this flea market. We were really busy now. We had the sign shop, bus driving, and flea market plus we ran the food concession in the market. In the spring I decided to stop driving the school bus. Then we decided to lease out our concession -- now Bernie and Don are running it. We are still very busy, though.

In the spring of 1986 we decided to renovate our place again. Bruce, now living in Vernon, came once more to help us with it. We wanted to have it completed before Lana's wedding. She married David Bury on the seventeenth of May, 1986. They have a beautiful baby boy who is just over a year old. They called him Kevin Justin. They are expecting their second child in the spring of 1987. David works for us as a sign installer and Lana periodically works in the office to help us out when we need her. Our son, John, works for us, too. He is also a sign installer, working in the shop as well as on the trucks.

Todd is in Grade ten. He is the athlete in our family. He plays hockey, football, baseball, and has taken up a new sport - golf. Todd has a job in the winter. He works the overhead door of our indoor parking lot in the flea market.

Our future hope would be to slow down our pace, and to enjoy our children and grandchildren to the fullest.
