# Paul Emile Alain

I, Paul Emile Michael Joseph Alain, was born October 6, 1920, in the Battleford Hospital in Saskatchewan. I was the tenth and last child of Henry and Alma Alain. We lived in Delmas and I don't remember a whole lot.

When I was three years old, Mom and I went to the farm at Uncle Pete's. They had a lot of horses and their big crop was hay. They had a big water trough and there was lots of geese swimming around; of course, they were my pets. Uncle Pete came in after work and he took a tin can and threw it, hitting one in the head and killing it. Well, I never forgot it. Uncle Pete came here to Kamloops to visit a stepdaughter and phoned me. He said, "I'm one of your uncles, the one that killed the goose!" Oh! I remembered him.

The big house in Delmas was two and a half storeys tall. It was a brick house and had no insulation in those days. I remember it being very cold despite central heating. We'd gather around the big register to get warm. There were six bedrooms; us kids all slept upstairs. There was a nice bannister with a cushion at the end and we all slid down it in the mornings. The house was finished in tongue-and-groove on the inside. It had an attic with big windows and a stairway leading to the roof. Of course, we were told never to go up there but we did once in awhile anyway.

In Delmas the Nuns were running the school. One day they were upstairs looking out at the sidewalk leading from the school to the street. We would go home for dinner because we never lived very far away. Well, Paul Morin (a cousin), Martin Lessard and I all hung around together. Paul was bigger than us and he said, “We aren’t going through the gate today; we’re going to the corner and jump the fence to save time.”

We said, “No,” but he was bigger and, I guess, like our boss so we jumped the fence. Well, the Nuns saw us and, when we came back at noon, we were called in. One of the Nuns told me I disobeyed and asked me why.

I said, “If I didn’t, Paul would give me a lickin’.” So she took the strap and gave Paul a couple of good whacks. Then she asked Martin the same and he said the same thing so Paul got another couple of whacks and we were let go. Then Paul’s turn came and he got a third lickin’. But on the way home Paul gave Martin and I a lickin’ in return.

Martin and I had started school together, although he was a year younger than I. Our education was all in French then; in the older grades, I believe they slowly switched to English.

I left Delmas at eight years of age and we settled at Veillardville across from the school. My dad, Louis, Rolland and Smokey went ahead of us and built the house. They left in the fall and we came later in the spring. We got off in Hudson Bay because the train wouldn’t stop in Veillardville. There was a guy there – Smokey’d know his name. He used Louis Strasser’s Model T Ford and Smokey took my dad’s and they met up and brought us to the farm. We arrived around eleven or twelve at night and Dad opened the door of the old shack and Mother looked around, not too pleased; but when she saw the new house she smiled a bit. But you know! She left a huge house with power and everything behind for this.

Well, us kids were excited though. We got up real early the next day and ran behind the barn and met our own creek. We couldn’t get over that. In Delmas we never had a creek. We even had our own trees to climb here. This was the start of our life in Veillardville. We weren’t there too long before Dad was on the school board as Trustee, etc.

While going to school there I met Reine but, of course, I didn’t like her then; she was three years younger. How the years changed my heart. I had met her brother Wilfred before but Reine, her mother and brother Lester came much later. I went to school with Clara, Mae Strasser, Gene and more. We were around fifty-two pupils, I was told. Some of my teachers were Nellie Barteluk, MacIntosh, Mildred Beaudoin, Miss Senecal and Phillippe Le Scelleur. When Nellie Barteluk was teaching, Smokey broke the land at the school with the John Deere tractor Dad had bought. Us kids would go at night and pick the roots. Nellie Barteluk organized us.

We weren’t allowed to have paper around our desks and, one day, I had some there but it belonged to Llewellyn Smith and Henry Bozak. So my punishment was to sweep the floor with Reine. I said I wouldn’t, so I was sent home. The next day, when I came back, I was told I had a choice to sweep the floor with Reine or pack my books and go home for good. I chose to go home with my books and that ended my schooling.

My dad had a sawmill right by the creek. My mother was a good cook and she and my sisters cooked for all the men that worked there. There were around eight of them. I remember when my dad bought the new John Deere tractor and Smokey got to drive it home from town. We all took turns driving it. The country was all bush then.

By the old house there were two old summer kitchens which Mother had shelves in and she used to put all her wild berries in bowls out there. This one time, we had all picked strawberries and she’d put sugar on them at night and the next day she would can them. Well, she asked all of us if we’d been in there eating them and we all said, “No.” Now, one night I came home from the mail and ran in the house to get a spoon and went to the old kitchen to get myself some sugared berries. While I was sitting on one side of the shelf eating, I could hear this smacking noise on the other side. I peeked and there was my dad with a spoon eating them, too. He looked at me and whispered, “Don’t tell your mother.”

My mother never ate deer or moose meat. She said it wasn’t good for you. I remember one time Mother saying she’d never eat it so Dad had Edith cook this meat. At the table, he asked Mother if she liked the meat and she said, “Oh, yes. It’s real good beef.” He got up and went into the living room and wrote on a paper. He then held it up behind her and it read, “Your mother is eating moose meat.”

After my schooling and working in the bush, I went down East and worked in the mines. Reine and I got married down east in Malartic, Quebec. Louis and Clara stood up for us. We were married at six in the morning and I had to go to work at four that afternoon.

I worked two years in the gold mines. I started out with a pick and shovel. Boy, jobs were so hard to get then because of there being thousands of unemployed men and it was at the outbreak of the war. The only way I got my job was a whole lot of men would go to the head frame where the old captain would come out right at lunchtime. Well, one day he came out and said, “We don’t hire Fridays, Saturdays or Sundays so go away. As a matter of fact, we’ll be laying off.” Well, I remember the next day was Friday the thirteenth. It was in 1940, just before Christmas. It was cold out but I was going back anyhow. I had been working in a store delivering groceries, doing the books, etc. The next day I went and I was the only one there. The old mine captain came out and saw me standing there. He said, “What the hell are you doing here? Weren’t you in that crowd yesterday?” I said, “Yes” and told him I wanted a job.

He said, “Do you speak French?” I said, “Yes and I read and write it, too.”

“Well,” he said, “come with me.” I did and I got the job, making 50¢ an hour. I found out there was a law then that they had to have 30% French speaking in the mine as the Quebecquois couldn’t speak English. The mine was owned by a Nova Scotian.

Back in Saskatchewan, I had registered for the army and they were always taking groups from the mine but I never got called. From the mine, where I worked for a couple of years, I moved to Flin Flon and stayed for a while. But I didn’t like my job so I moved back to Veillardville where I helped with harvesting and working at the mill. That’s when I got the quarter of land and the house. I tore it all apart and cut the roof down and moved it; it was originally further south than where it is now. The same year Thrussels, Martin Lessard, Gene Lessard, Rolland and I were all building so we formed a pool and poured our cement together. We’d do one place and then move on to the next. We lived in our garage and I divided it into two and moved everything in it. We lived like that with four kids in there. Uncle Joe L’Heureux came late in the year and said, “Oh, you’ll never get moved in before winter.”

Boy, it had the shingles on already and I said, “Oh yes, we will be” and we were because the garage wouldn’t have been warm enough. We had lots of help then, too, and all the lumber came from Dad’s mill and the insulation was shavings.

After that I worked for the C.N.R. for three or four years. I went to Flin Flon twice. I worked north of Churchill River for one winter building camps. I worked four years for MacMillan Bloedel.

In 1965, Reine and I moved with Lloyd, Donna and Kerry to Kamloops, B.C. Lloyd stayed in Golden, B.C. with Bruce as Louis, Clara and family were living there. That is where Lloyd got on at the sawmill.

We carried on and we’ve never looked back. I couldn’t get over the money to be made there. I could leave home, when I worked for myself, at five in the morning and get back at two in the afternoon with $100.00 in my pocket.

I went to work for three months on the Gang Ranch, north in the Cariboo country. They had 1200 head of cattle. The ranch was 80 miles long and 40 miles wide. I was repairing equipment there. We then were thinking about going to Keremeos, B.C., where there was a garage and coffee shop business for sale. Well, I went to the manpower office in Kamloops and then we went to Keremeos to see the garage, etc., and then back home. The next morning I got a call to go to the school board so I went and I liked it alot. The money was good and everyone was good to work with. Come fall I knew I'd be getting laid off but then I was told if I had steam papers I could get on in another area. Well, I had the papers so I then worked with the boilers. I went back to school and got my gas tickets and steam tickets and became a heat technician.

I am now retired and enjoy our life in B.C. I putter around in my shop doing a bit of woodwork for myself and others. I sometimes do a bit of furnace work. We have a motorhome now and travel some.
