# Moise L'Heureux

*(as told by grandsons, Smokey Alain and Hervé Nolin)*

Moise L'Heureux was a short, handsome man with white hair and a big black moustache. He was firm with his children and most kind to his grandchildren, a good business man as well as one of the richest ranchers around. He was born in Quebec City, Quebec, in the year 1858. As a young man, he came West with a brother who later settled in Alberta. Moise was hired to work for the railroad in Crowsnest Pass. After several years he returned East and married his girlfriend, Sophie Pichette. After their marriage they lived in Winnipeg, Manitoba, where their two eldest children, Alma and Arthur, were born. Later they moved West to the mountains where Moise again worked for the railroad. On returning to Saskatchewan, the family settled on a homestead in the Jackfish Lake area which was about fifteen miles from Battleford on the Saskatchewan River. They lived in a log shack as did many other people in the area. While most homes had a floor of earth, their home had a wooden floor. The L'Heureux home was a well-known stopping place where all people who came that way -- including Indians -- were made welcome.

Moise was a hard worker who tried his hand at a variety of jobs -- Indian Agent, rancher, farmer and post master. At one time he worked on his ranch north of Battleford besides working in Highgate as well. At times he worked night and day.

Life was not easy for those wishing to purchase their supplies in Battleford as there was no bridge over the Saskatchewan River, so the men would tie the wagon box down to the wheels and let the horses swim across.

The ranch offered work to many men: sometimes during haying time there were as many as eight hired men working for them. Horses, cattle and sheep were kept in abundance. Smokey Alain, one of their grandchildren, recalls how he used to tease the sheep: "One day a few sheep chased me up on the tractor and three or four rams were trying to climb up with me. It just so happened that Granddad Moise came out of the house carrying two pails of feed for the pigs when he spotted me on the tractor. He got them in the rear with the pails and off they went, so I could come down. Granddad Moise turned to me and said, 'You little begger, you're the one who has been teasing the sheep!' The puzzle had been solved."

Sophie and Moise were blessed with fifteen children and looked after two granddaughters, Alma and Alice L'Heureux (Leonidas' children) following their mother's death. As time went on, more grandchildren arrived and they too spent their summer holidays on the ranch where they could enjoy their grandmother's cookies and ride horses, too.

Moise and Sophie had a big house, six bedrooms upstairs and a large kitchen which ran the length of the house. The table had benches on either side and could seat about twenty people. At that time, the girls remained home till they married, so one can imagine all the stories that were told at that large table. Most evenings were spent with the men playing cards while the women knit socks and mitts.

Sophie had a big spinning wheel and she spun the wool from their sheep into big balls which were later knit into necessary mitts and socks. She knit socks not only for her own family but also for the whole parish! She loved to bake and, with her large family, she needed to do so frequently. Her Christmas cake was usually five or six layers high and always iced. One year her sons, Toni, Pierre and Wilfrid lifted the whole cake up and cut out the middle of the bottom layer, leaving just the outside shell. When Sophie began to cut the cake, her knife went right through, much to her surprise. The boys were always doing something, like sneaking into the ice house to eat pies and cakes which were stored there. Of course, cream was kept there as well. In those days, cream was used sparingly for eating as it was kept mainly for making butter or for sale -- a means of earning much-needed money. It is a known fact that Sophie used to set mouse traps around the pies and cream to keep curious fingers out.

The large garden they had, meant a lot of work. It was looked on with pride and, when intruders came, they were quickly disposed of. Sophie killed many a porcupine who was feeding on her garden and then she proceeded to skin and prepare them for eating.

Moise was seventy-three years old when he died and Sophie was eighty-three. They are both buried in the cemetery in Jackfish. Sophie and Moise were highly respected residents of this part of Western Canada. They had shared both hardships and success with the same indomitable spirit which marks the true pioneers who have helped to make Canada's history and now have "Gone West."
